feat: How to configure custom editors definitions (#2738)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/configuring-editors-definitions.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:description: Configuring editors definitions
:keywords: administration guide, configuring, dashboard, editors
:navtitle: Configuring editors definitions
:page-aliases: installation-guide:configuring-editors-definitions.adoc

[id="configuring-editors-definitions"]
= Configuring editors definitions

> This procedure describes how to configure {prod-short} editor definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn how to configure {prod-short} editor definitions.
```

> This procedure describes how to configure {prod-short} editors definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This procedure describes how to configure {prod-short} editor definitions.
```

.Prerequisites

* An active `{orch-cli}` session with administrative permissions to the {orch-name} cluster. See {orch-cli-link}.

.Procedure

> . Create the `my-editor-definition-devfile.yaml` YAML file with editor definition configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create the `my-editor-definition-devfile.yaml` YAML file with the editor definition configuration.
```

+

> Ensure to provide the actual values for `publisher` and `version` under `metadata.attributes`.
> They are used to construct the editor id along with editor name in the following format `publisher/name/version`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
====
Make sure you provide the actual values for `publisher` and `version` under `metadata.attributes`.
They are used to construct the editor id along with editor name in the following format `publisher/name/version`.
====
```

+
Below you can find the supported values, including optional ones:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
# Version of the devile schema
schemaVersion: 2.2.2
# Meta information of the editor
metadata:
  # (MANDATORY) The editor name
  name: EditorName
  displayName: Display Name
  description: Run Editor Foo on top of Eclipse Che

>   # (OPTIONAL) Array of tags of the current editor. Tech-Preview means it's considered experimental and is not recommended for production environments. While it can include new features and improvements, it may still contain bugs or undergo significant changes before reaching a stable version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # (OPTIONAL) Array of tags of the current editor. The Tech-Preview tag means the option is considered experimental and is not recommended for production environments. While it can include new features and improvements, it may still contain bugs or undergo significant changes before reaching a stable version.
```

      volumeMounts:
          # The name of the mount
        - name: checode
          # The path of the mount
          path: /checode
      # (OPTIONAL) The memory limit of the container
      memoryLimit: 256Mi
      # (OPTIONAL) The memory request of the container
      memoryRequest: 32Mi
      # (OPTIONAL) The CPU limit of the container
      cpuLimit: 500m
      # (OPTIONAL) The CPU request of the container
      cpuRequest: 30m
  # Name of the component
  - name: che-code-runtime-description
    # (OPTIONAL) Map of implementation-dependant free-form YAML attributes
    attributes:
      # The component within the architecture
      app.kubernetes.io/component: che-code-runtime
      # The name of a higher level application this one is part of
      app.kubernetes.io/part-of: che-code.eclipse.org
      # Defines a container component as a "container contribution". If a flattened DevWorkspace has a container component with the merge-contribution attribute, then any container contributions are merged into that container component
      controller.devfile.io/container-contribution: true
    container:

>       # Can be dummy image because the compoent is expected to be injected into workspace dev component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      # Can be a dummy image because the component is expected to be injected into workspace dev component
```

      image: quay.io/devfile/universal-developer-image:latest

>       # (OPTIONAL) List of volumes mounts that should be mounted in this container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      # (OPTIONAL) List of volume mounts that should be mounted in this container
```

      volumeMounts:
          # The name of the mount
        - name: checode

>           # (OPTIONAL) The path in the component container where the volume should be mounted. If not path is mentioned, default path is the is /<name>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          # (OPTIONAL) The path in the component container where the volume should be mounted. If no path is defined, the default path is the is /<name>
```

          path: /checode
      # (OPTIONAL) The memory limit of the container
      memoryLimit: 1024Mi
      # (OPTIONAL) The memory request of the container
      memoryRequest: 256Mi
      # (OPTIONAL) The CPU limit of the container
      cpuLimit: 500m
      # (OPTIONAL) The CPU request of the container
      cpuRequest: 30m
      # (OPTIONAL) Environment variables used in this container
      env:
        - name: ENV_NAME
          value: value
      # Component endpoints
      endpoints:
        # Name of the editor
        - name: che-code
          # (OPTIONAL) Map of implementation-dependant string-based free-form attributes
          attributes:

>             # Type of the endpoint. It only allows for it's value to be set to main  which indicates that the endpoint should be used as the mainUrl in the workspace status (i.e. it should be the URL used to access the editor in this context)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Type of the endpoint. You can only set its value to main, indicating that the endpoint should be used as the mainUrl in the workspace status (i.e. it should be the URL used to access the editor in this context)
```

            discoverable: false
            # Used to secure the endpoint with authorization on OpenShift, so that not anyone on the cluster can access the endpoint, the attribute enables authentication.
            urlRewriteSupported: true
          # Port number to be used within the container component
          targetPort: 3100
          # (OPTIONAL) Describes how the endpoint should be exposed on the network (public, internal, none)
          exposure: public
          # (OPTIONAL) Describes whether the endpoint should be secured and protected by some authentication process
          secure: true
          # (OPTIONAL) Describes the application and transport protocols of the traffic that will go through this endpoint
          protocol: https
    # Mandatory name that allows referencing the component from other elements
  - name: checode
    # (OPTIONAL) Allows specifying the definition of a volume shared by several other components. Ephemeral volumes are not stored persistently across restarts. Defaults to false
    volume: {ephemeral: true}
# (OPTIONAL) Bindings of commands to events. Each command is referred-to by its name
events:

>   # IDs of commands that should be executed before the devworkspace start. This commands would typically be executed in init container

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # IDs of commands that should be executed before the devworkspace start. These commands would typically be executed in an init container
```

  preStart:
    - init-container-command

>   # IDs of commands that should be executed after the devworkspace is completely started. In the case of Che-Code, these commands should be executed after all plugins and extensions have started, including project cloning. This means that those commands are not triggered until the user opens the IDE in his browser

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # IDs of commands that should be executed after the devworkspace has completely started. In the case of Che-Code, these commands should be executed after all plugins and extensions have started, including project cloning. This means that those commands are not triggered until the user opens the IDE within the browser
```

  postStart:
    - init-che-code-command
# (OPTIONAL) Predefined, ready-to-use, devworkspace-related commands
commands:
    # Mandatory identifier that allows referencing this command
  - id: init-container-command
    apply:

>       # Describes component to which given action relates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      # Describes the component for the apply command
```

      component: che-code-injector
    # Mandatory identifier that allows referencing this command
  - id: init-che-code-command
    # CLI Command executed in an existing component container
    exec:

>       # Describes component to which given action relates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      # Describes component for the exec command
```

      component: che-code-runtime-description
      # The actual command-line string
      commandLine: 'nohup /checode/entrypoint-volume.sh > /checode/entrypoint-logs.txt
        2>&1 &'
----

. Create a ConfigMap with the editor definition content:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} create configmap my-editor-definition --from-file=my-editor-definition-devfile.yaml -n {prod-namespace}
----

. Add the required labels to the ConfigMap:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} label configmap my-editor-definition app.kubernetes.io/part-of=che.eclipse.org app.kubernetes.io/component=editor-definition -n {prod-namespace}
----

> . Refresh the {prod-short} Dashboard page to see new available editors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Refresh the {prod-short} Dashboard page to see new available editor.
```
